Automatic Property-based Testing for Operational Semantics

In this dissertation, I investigate the effectiveness of
automatic property-based testing in a lightweight framework
for semantics engineering. The lightweight approach is
intended as a complement to more powerful formal modeling
tools. By providing the benefits of execution, exploration, 
and testing early in the development process, bugs can be
caught early, before significant effort is expended on 
proofs of correctness. Specifically, I show how lightweight
specifications can be leveraged to automatically
derive effective test-case generators.

This work develops several new approaches to test-case
generation for PLT Redex, a lightweight semantics framework
embedded in Racket. Redex emphasizes property-based testing
by allowing users to write predicates expressing desirable
properties and attempting to falsify them by automatically 
generating many test cases. In keeping with the lightweight
approach, Redex generators are intended to be as
``push-button'' as possible, and are derived from Redex models 
with little additional input from the user. First, I
present several methods for deriving generators,
including a generic method for randomly generating 
well-typed expressions, the main contribution of this work. 
Starting from a specification of a typing judgment in 
Redex, this method uses a specialized solver that employs 
randomness to find many different valid derivations of the 
judgment form.

To evaluate the effectiveness of the different generators,
I present a random testing benchmark of Redex
models and bugs. I discuss the benchmark and the 
performance of the different generators at bug-finding,
along with an additional case study comparing the typed
generator against the best available custom well-typed
term generator.  The new generator is much more effective 
than generation techniques that do not explicitly take types 
into account and is competitive with the custom 
generator, even though it is specialized to a particular
type system and Redex's generator is generic.
